It wasn't just done out of the blue.
It was Her choosing the names,
explaining the meaning,
and that yogi writing it down
in Marathi or Sanskrit.
Then the translation
She had to correct also.
She didn't like some of the translations
that yogi would do.
So, it was very much an evolving process
of the names—just Her names.
So there's a lot of power in that.
We don't want to alter
or change any of that.
We have a mantra book.
It's been done by Shri Mataji,
blessed by Shri Mataji.
And even things like the chakra chart.
I remember, I would say
it was like 1971 or '72.
I was a little girl.
I was sitting in the back.
There were about 150 people
in the public program,
and I was doing my homework on a slate—
we call it a Marathi pati—with chalk.
I was doing my times tables because
my exam for math was the next day.
I was nine or ten years old.
Suddenly, She called my name
and said, "Give me your slate."
I honestly thought
She was checking my homework.
I got really nervous, thinking,
"Oh my God, now the whole 150 of them
are going to know I made a mistake
in my times table."
So I went with the pati, the slate.
She turned it around to the side
which was blank,
and She drew a chakra chart.
It was just a triangle with three nadis,
with the little lotus on the top
and the Sushumna in the middle.
Then She showed everybody.
Everybody came closer to look
at this diagram
of what the subtle system looks like,
because there was no chart.
This was the very early '70s.
I know I was super relieved
that it was not my homework
She wanted to check.
But there’s a little sweet story there:
when I gave the slate to Her,
She did look at my times tables.
I was so nervous She was going to
find a mistake.
I don't recall much, but when I went
and sat down in the back,
She had put a little tick mark.
She had actually checked it.
Talk about multitasking!
Here She is drawing the chakra chart,
and then She checks my homework
and puts a little tick.
It was very intimate.
Soon enough, one of the yogis,
Maureshwar, was inspired
to draw a chakra chart.
He was an artist, only 12 or 13.
He came to Shri Mataji,
and of course, She was happy
that he was doing it,
but there were many corrections.
The spelling of Muladhara...
I mean, it went through three or four
corrections before the final
chakra chart was approved.
Then we had one chakra chart made
for the whole collective
that had to go everywhere She went.
We had to take it until somebody said,
"It's not working.
There are programs everywhere.
We need more than one chakra chart."
So, it was very much
organic learning as we went.
Attention was always on Shri Mataji.
Again, with puja specifically,
I feel like we have to ready ourselves
before any puja.
For us, the puja—
doesn't matter what it's called,
Krishna, Ganesh, whatever—
is an Atma-Paramatma puja.
We really have to be ready within us
that today, on this day,
my Atma is going to connect
to the all-pervading Paramatma.
That feeling is Bhakti, it's adoration.
As a poet, you could write poetry on that.
Honestly, it's such a deep meaning.
It's that connection that we came here for.
She chose us, right?
We came into Sahaja Yoga.
We were chosen by the Paramatma,
by the All-Pervading, to be Her children.
And we need to stand up to it.
We need to keep that as a priority.
It's okay if you forget a little something
in the offering of it,
because that's an external puja.
I am not saying we should break protocols
that have been going on,
but I think the inside puja
is a lot more precious,
where you absolutely have to remember
why you are here, what is your purpose,
and what is this puja about.
It's for you.
These 300 Atmas have to connect to Her,
the Paramatma.
Once that is okay, things are just...
the vibrations flow.
I don't even know.
I've made so many mistakes in pujas,
in Sakshat pujas, in the offerings.
I can give quick examples.
She came in 1985 to San Diego.
We got married in '84.
I was the first Indian Yogini
who came from India.
I was only 22,
with no experience in puja preparation.
Shri Mataji arrived in San Diego,
so I prepared what I thought
should be for puja.
Now, I had a little bit of experience
in India with the grown-ups,
but I never was doing it all—
like the whole puja preparation.
I was too young.
Anyway, I knew that sandalwood
pleases the Divine.
We have this in Marathi called sahan khod.
Sahan is the stone,
and khod is the sandalwood.
You make this fresh sandalwood paste, right?
You put water and you keep rubbing.
So I made a small container of it.
Shri Mataji came and saw
the puja preparation.
It was only me;
they were all Americans in the ashram.
No other Indian had been matched
to an American yet.
She looked at it and said,
"Is it a sandalwood paste?
How did you make it?"
I said, "Shri Mataji, with hand."
So She said, "Only this much?"
I had a little small container.
But then She said,
"Okay, now put it on My feet."
I thought when you put it on the feet,
we're going to put it
on the top of the feet.
But She wanted the whole soles
of the feet rubbed
with that little sandalwood paste.
I felt so ashamed because it was like
two teaspoons that I had made.
She has two feet with all the soles
She wanted covered,
because She said that the sandalwood
absorbs the heat. It's very cooling.
I understood, okay, it's my Nabhi too.
I should have been generous, right?
How long does it take
to make a little bit more paste?
But again, nobody was there to guide me.
There were no aunties, no grown-ups,
no Indians even in Sahaja Yoga.
So, next year,
I made a nice full katori of it.
Same thing—that's '86 or '87,
another puja.
She looks at it and She goes,
"Ah, but My feet are not hot."
When I made the large amount,
She didn't need it.
But when I didn't make enough,
She wanted it for Herself.
That taught me that we don't know anything.
We really don't know anything
with the Divine.
We are human. We are realized humans,
but Divinity is Divinity.
You cannot second guess.
You cannot think ahead.
You have to let go completely
and do it with joy.
Even when She would say,
"Where is your attention?"
Marathi language is strong,
so we get told this since we are little
by uncles and aunties—
there's no reaction.
It's like, "Oh yes, where is my attention?"
and you move on.
You fix yourself so you don't make
that mistake again.
You might make another mistake,
some completely different one,
but there's that relationship.
It's a symbiotic relationship.
As much as we needed Her, She needed us.
We are the foundation of Sahaja Yoga.
In America in the '80s,
Sahaja Yoga was not big;
you could count on your fingers and toes
how many yogis were there in '85 or '86.
One cannot exist without the other;
God cannot exist without His devotees
and devotees cannot exist without God.
So, we are all in it together.
We should keep that feeling
that all of us are one,
and all of us are wanting
to connect to Her.
So, what protocol can you break?
Like, how much dirt can a little drop
of water collect
that the ocean cannot clean?
It just doesn't work like that.
You can be as polluted as you are,
but in Her presence, by Her grace,
it's no more. That is a reality.
In pujas, I have seen sometimes
older yogis correcting newer ones a lot,
which causes a reaction or fear in them
because they feel,
"Oh, I broke some protocol."
And they did. But if you are open
to the grace of Shri Mataji,
if your heart is clean,
there is no mistake you can make.
I am not saying don't follow protocol.
Absolutely, there were certain protocols
that She Herself wanted.
She made it easy for us by telling us,
for example, don't draw swastikas
the other way—it's a Hitler sign,
it's evil, it's negative.
She told us all these things,
so don't make such mistakes.
But be a little fluid.
There's no need for left Vishuddhi
because something is missing.
The reason I say that is because
all the years that I was attending
to Shri Mataji, it was extremely fluid.
There was no recipe or prescription
for doing anything a particular way.
She was not that; She was so much more
and beyond that.
As long as the vibrations were flowing,
as long as your Atma was open to Her...
you absolutely had to open
yourself to Her.
Like you're facing the sun and the flower
has to face the sun to receive the rays.
The flower just has to be open,
face the sun, and receive.
Then things work out.
The flower blooms.
It doesn't have to do anything.
It just has to open itself
to the grace of the Divine,
and it is going to blossom.
Nothing can stop it.
I don't know if any of this
helps with the questions.
I've heard there are some questions
which I can answer the best I can,
but I cannot say that every puja
was the same way,
because She would switch things up.
In the pujas in the '80s and '90s—
mostly '90s—She would just look
and direct you with just a look.
So, even though all the trays were ready
and we were decorating the feet,
She would put her hand out.
I am decorating Her feet,
but She wanted bangles put on
at the same time.
You cannot do that physically.
So, you did what She said.
You just finish whatever you were doing,
go put the bangles on,
go back, and decorate.
It was absolutely fluid.
Even though there was some structure,
you had to do what She wanted.
You just had to pay attention to Her,
no matter what was going on around you.
It felt so natural. It wasn't ritual.
It was just this play between the Divine
and the few humans
that were on the stage.
In that context, I would like to share
some joyful stories.
Krishna Puja in the mid-90s—
I want to say it's 1997,
but I am not 100% sure which year.
The Americas used to host
Krishna Puja in Cabella.
We were there as hosting countries:
Canada, South America, North America.
This puja, Anand Murdeshwar—
an amazing flautist, as you know—
would come every year
for Krishna Puja.
The puja is going on.
Shri Mataji is on stage.
The Devi Puja is going on,
so the ladies are holding the sari,
and there are two ladies
decorating the feet.
With me was a Sahaja Yogini
from South America.
She didn't speak English, and she was
the one the country chose
to decorate Shri Mataji's feet.
So, we both are on the stage.
We met at the feet.
I didn't know who she was;
we didn't know each other,
not even names.
Somebody must have told her,
"Just follow her."
So we were on the stage
decorating the feet.
This has never happened to me
in prior pujas or pujas after,
but this particular puja,
the music and bhajans were amazing,
and Shri Mataji was absolutely
enjoying the music.
In that enjoyment,
and in Her form of Shri Krishna,
She was moving Her feet.
Like when you keep tal (rhythm).
She wasn't doing it with Her hand,
but She was moving Her feet.
Her feet were vibrating;
She wasn't lifting them off,
but they were moving.
Now we have to draw the swastikas
on moving feet.
This lady, it's the first time
she's looking at me, like,
"How should we hold the feet?"
I said, "No, no."
She didn't know; she was brand new.
I said, "No, we just have to decorate
the feet while they're dancing, really."
So, again, She's not lifting them
off the ground,
but they're definitely moving.
This had never happened before.
She would always keep Her feet
very still while we were decorating them,
bending over to correct us.
This one, now the feet are moving,
so we had to decorate
like catching the wave.
When it's a little still,
you make a line.
Then you make another line.
So, it's not a straight line, right?
It's choppy.
Anyway, the swastikas are done,
and the joy pours.
She was thoroughly enjoying it.
Whenever there was a high note,
the feet went a little bit higher,
like the heels were up.
We were trying to make the swastikas
look good,
so they match in the photograph.
It was a very beautiful moment.
She was enjoying us.
Her feet were dancing
in a vibrating way.
For me, it felt like I was in Gokul
with Shri Krishna dancing.
He's like, "You want to paint my feet?
Try it. Let's see if you can do it."
That kind of mischief.
I hope you guys feel the vibrations
of this moment
because it was so precious that She was
in that element of Shri Krishna.
After the beautiful puja,
lots of vibrations,
the heart was bursting with joy
because of Her joy.
Then we go to the castle.
Everybody leaves, the hubbub dies down.
She changes from the puja sari
to the sari She wears at night
to go to sleep.
That's when She saw Her feet.
She looked at them, and literally,
they looked like a kid
had drawn a swastika.
They did not look like
nice, smooth swastikas.
So I'm pulling my ears, thinking
she hadn't even looked down earlier.
That's when She saw them.
As soon as She looked down,
She had this big smile,
and She said, "That is Sri Krishna."
It was such a beautiful moment.
It reminded you—we already felt it.
The whole Cabella collective said
after that puja
that it was so powerful and so joyful.
The word that kept coming
was "joyful" and "light."
It was a whole different feeling
created by Her joy to be with us.
She was enjoying us and the music.
The other story is equally beautiful.
This is another year, mid-90s,
on a Saturday.
Shri Mataji, after waking up,
was going to meet different people,
but then She had a little bit
of free time.
Puja was on Sunday, Krishna Puja.
She came out
into the Cabella living room.
There's a balcony
outside the living room,
so She wanted the doors open
and She came out.
She's standing in the balcony
looking down.
It's many levels, right?
Seven floors or whatever.
She's looking down
at all this hubbub of activity.
The children are playing,
the groceries are coming,
and She's watching all that happening
from way up there.
Nobody looks up; they are all
going to the kitchen or doing their job.
So She stood there, watching everybody,
and She looked very pleased.
She comes inside the living room
and said,
"See what's going on downstairs."
I could tell from Her body language
that She was pleased with something.
So I go all the way down to the kitchen,
which is in the basement.
Next to the kitchen is the dining room.
As I'm coming down,
I start hearing music.
When I go to the dining room,
it was a very surreal feeling.
There were about 80 or 90 yogis.
Since Krishna Puja was the next day
and we were the hosting countries,
one of the things we did on Saturday
was have fresh butter ready.
In Italy, you buy this Italian cream
in glass bottles.
You buy maybe 100 or 200 bottles
because each bottle makes only about
one tablespoon of butter.
You needed to fill that handi,
the whole butter pot.
The way you did it was
by shaking the bottles
so that the butter would separate
from the whey.
So now you have to shake by hand.
It takes 20 to 25 minutes
to make one tablespoon of butter
by shaking the bottle.
We used to always co-opt people,
asking whoever is around in the castle,
"Come, please help us make butter."
This day, there were probably
30 countries represented—
people who had just come to meditate
were grabbed to help.
So now everybody is gathered
around the dining table,
sitting, standing,
and they're shaking the butter.
They all have two bottles,
one in each hand.
This Romanian Yogini who had
a beautiful voice started singing.
As she's singing,
they're shaking the butter.
You should feel the vibrations of this:
30 countries making butter
for Shri Krishna Puja.
There were no instruments, no tabla,
nothing fancy—just bangles.
The bangles are going jing, jing, jing,
and the lady was singing,
and people were matching the sound
of their bangles to the singing.
That became an instrument.
It was magical.
I was watching and, again,
that feeling of "This is Gokul."
No language, but she was singing
simple songs that everybody could sing.
She was the main singer,
and everybody was the chorus.
The cooking happening in the kitchen
stopped.
They could feel the vibrations
automatically,
so they all came and joined.
Now we have 100-plus yogis
around the dining table
shaking for 30 minutes,
singing beautifully.
After seeing that, I came up.
In the meantime, while I was gone,
She went and changed.
One of the duties of anyone
attending to Shri Mataji
was that She would give instructions—
"I want to wear this sari for Puja,"
or "I want to wear this
for the entertainment night."
You were the one preparing everything,
and if She changed Her mind last minute,
you were there to immediately change
or press the sari.
Nothing was laid out;
She was not "ready"
for anything specific.
But while this was happening downstairs,
She went and changed into a beautiful
Chanderi sari in a Gujarati style—
the style of Radha—on Her own.
This was not very often; She went,
opened the cupboard, got Her sari out,
changed completely,
and became Shri Radha.
When I came up, She was dressed
in what looked almost like a Puja sari.
She was sitting reclined
on that white couch in the living room,
Her eyes almost closed but with
this beautiful smile on Her face.
I walked in and realized
I had to be very quiet.
I kind of hid behind because I saw
She had changed
and was enjoying the vibrations.
After some time, She said,
"Huh, Puja is done."
Here we were, and the backdrop
wasn't even up
because the Puja was Sunday.
Poor Dave and the group were on
the Puja stage preparing for Sunday.
But She said, "Puja is done."
I was surprised.
She was just so happy and said,
"See, it's the right day for Puja
because it's Shaniwar."
Shaniwar in Marathi is Saturday—
Shani is Saturn,
the planet of Vishuddhi.
The Puja was on the right day.
What set it off was these hundred yogis—
their joyful, spontaneous,
collective love for Shri Mataji.
It was collectivity
with 30 or 40 countries.
It was absolutely joyful,
it literally drew people in
from the kitchen,
and it was totally spontaneous.
The Puja had happened in essence.
I remember the following year,
I kind of sheepishly asked Shri Mataji,
"This year, would You like to have Puja
on Saturday instead of Sunday?"
Now I'm thinking, wow,
it should be on Saturday.
She said, "No, no, no.
The musicians are coming to perform
on Saturday evening,
and it's convenient for the yogis
to have it on Sunday."
So, that never came up again.
It was always on Sundays.
This is a beautiful story
of how Pujas were very alive.
It was a living process, not a ritual.
It was a symbiotic play between
the Divine and us realized souls.
We were all one,
She taking us all under Her pallu
(protection) and moving us along
to the next level in our evolution.
That was the goal of Puja:
to make us go deeper and grow within.
So, if people have questions, honestly,
just surrender the questions
to Shri Mataji.
You will find your answers.
I really want you all to feel
what a joy every Puja was.
I know some Pujas were tough,
like Guru Pujas, where She was strict.
But there was a big change inside
that would happen for each Puja,
and you felt it.
Every Puja was a growth.
Thank you so much, everybody.
Thank you.
Jai Shri Mataji.